# Thread gem for ORuby (EXPERIMENTAL)

This oruby gem is not part of the ORuby fullcore.

This is EXPERIMENTAL code. MRuby does not have any support for concurrent access.

If you are using ORuby scripting, you should (probably) create oruby.MrbState for any
concurrent goroutine, and communicate with other states in other goroutines using Go patterns.

## Install

```go
import (
	"github.com/oruby/oruby"

	_ "github.com/oruby/oruby/gem/thread"
)
```

## Docs

Thread gem follows ORuby "core gems code" to be as close as possible to MRI Ruby core,
so you can consult docs for Ruby Thread methods.

## Implementation

Current implementation is port of mruby-thread [mruby-thread][mruby-thread] which clones
mruby state, and then block is run in new thread, in that separete cloned state.

I hold it that this idea is so cool, and nice example of out-of-the-box-thinking solution.
It solves basic issue: no concurrency support in mruby. Yet, instead of polluting API with
locks, GIL, and who-knows-what it clones entire state and runs it in its own thread.

There are downsides:

	* It is slow to start a new thread. It takes time and memory to copy everything a
    state holds - variables, symols, objects, methods.
  * Not everything can be cloned by simple copying.

Alternatives:

	 * Go implementation could speed up, or skip some copying
	 * Go have lightwieght threads, but that means locks or something like GIL
	 * Again: separate ORuby state can be created for every therad, and then use Go
	   patterns for thread communication.

## Usage

```go
package main

import (
	"github.com/oruby/oruby"

	_ "github.com/oruby/oruby/gem/thread"
)

func main() {
	mrb := oruby.MrbOpen()
	defer mrb.Close()

	v, err := mrb.Eval(`
		Thread.start { "yea" }.join
	`)

	println(v.String())
}

// Should output:
// "yea"
```

## License

ORuby is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License][license]

(c) 2020, Dušan D. Majkić

## Authors

* Dušan D. Majkić [oruby]
* Yasuhiro Matsumoto [mruby-thread]

[license]: http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
[oruby]: https://github.com/oruby/oruby
[mruby-thread]: https://github.com/mattn/mruby-thread